Hello everybody and welcome to this lecture.
This is gonna be more of an exploratory look at modelling in general to think about future work flow
and also focus on not having too much geometry I've already said that a couple of times but how can
we go about making this higher poly.
As I've mentioned even though we were I know we're working on a low poly model at the moment but how
would we go about making this high poly from low poly.
I feel like I need to show you that rather than just saying yeah yeah it can be low poly and still be
high poly at the same time that doesn't make any sense especially if your new to it.
So what can we do here.
Well one of the things that you can do almost immediately is whilst in object mode make sure smooth
shadings turned on when you have smooth shading turned on opposed to flat shading.
You will see.
And that's that's the right mouse menu there the context your menu.
Some people will like this faceted look and I think I'm going to go for more of that faceted look almost
like cut stone rather than the smooth look.
It's entirely up to you.
And of course we've already explored how you can go into your object data properties and go to the normals
and turn on auto smooth and then you can change where that threshold occurs.
So that's also another option for you when it comes to that.
But if we're working on a higher poly model it's generally going to be smoothed in general and then you
will control sharpness in another way.
So the first and primary way of doing this and the one I want to cover here is to simply add in a modifier
that is a sub division surface modifier.
This is a modifier that's awesome.
You can see he has already started to make things smoother but it's also changed it from looking like
a pawn to a chocolate marshmallow or something like that.
Anyway if I then turn the subdivisions in the view up once more you can see it's getting smoother.
And let's go all the way up to three on both the view and the render, the render is important because
if we set the render down at zero let's say yet the viewport is lovely and smooth.
When we go ahead and render it it will still look all jagged.
Now is common to have a lower view setting and a higher render setting for optimization.
Now in this particular case I don't mind it being at three you can see the amount of triangles that
have appeared polygons in this case is much much higher than that vertices we've gone from I can't remember
what it was let's go back 52 all the way to two thousand eight hundred and twenty two.
So huge increase and that's one of the most important things about subdivision and anything that can
get exponential like this is you need to be careful you you can very easily either crash blender or
lock it up when you play with this and we'll talk about this particular modifier in much more detail later
on.
One cool thing that you can do is if we tab into edit mode you can see that it is still the underlying
geometry is this flat faceted look.
Although we have a look at it from the side it doesn't resemble that much anymore.
But there are things we can do to change that.
So for instance here I'm going to turn on adjust cage to the modifier result.
I think that makes it look just a little bit better and easier to see what's going on rather than leaving
it all jagged like this.
It means when we start adjusting things in a moment we can adjust them knowing that the cage.
The outer bounds match what we're doing.
So the first thing that I will show you here is if we open up the sidebar here whilst in edit mode if
I select the edge loop that runs around the top here what I can do is increase this option here.
The mean crease.
And because this top bit here will be somewhere where another piece will be mated onto I want it to
be an exact circle like it was before.
So I can turn that mean increase all the way up to 100 percent or a value of one and the same is true
at this bottom point here so I'm gonna select that edge loop and increase the mean increase there and
you can see straight away I'm going to go all the way to one one and knock it back ever so slightly
to keep the edge slightly rounded.
And there we go.
It's already starting to look much much better and I can hold down alt and select this edge loop around
here and I'm going to flip into orthoprojection so I can watch what's going on.
I can simply scale that back up to fit and I can do the same for this one here so I can scale this back
up.
One thing you'll notice with the subdivision is it shrinks things.
So you do have to watch out for that.
And I can bring that back in here and we can see we've got a nice looking model again.
But the underlying geometry is very very simple and I think that's the real appeal here.
So that next thing I want to think about here is this previous bit is very very smooth.
However is lacking the little hump that it had before so I feel that I need to add in a little bit of
geometry here and perhaps scale out to reintroduce that hump that was once there.
Now whether or not that's the look you're going for is entirely up to you.
And remember you can adjust this mean crease to change how hard that transition is.
I say that all the way at one we end up with a much different look a very sharp top to it there.
Then if I just turn that down slightly so we can adjust things accordingly.
And where this transition is I think that's where a mean increase could be in where we go if we increase
it we get a much stronger step between the two places.
And then again you can come back in and tweak these options and sizes and scales to your heart's content
to make it look better.
And generally with this workflow as you can see there's far less geometry to worry about.
And of course we've got ourselves a pretty good looking model.
Now I didn't say there were other ways so I'm not just going to leave it there.
We could go back to our bowling pin and make the pawn or suddenly the base that we're working on at
the moment in a very similar manner but you will often find you'll end up with more geometry as you
probably noticed.
This base contains a lot less geometry than our pin did when we were working with that.
And that is because we're employing a different type of workflow which relies on generated geometry
rather than real geometry that we can work on directly.
And as you can see here we end up with some very nice smooth curves and transitions between and we can
still control it quite well.
I'm going to take this bit in the middle and increase the mean increase here to really tuck that
in I'm going to whiz round to the side and scale that out just a little more and then I'm going to increase
it again to make that that transition between the areas much stronger and then we can have a look at
it and just see how it looks overall.
And as you look across it you will notice it looks a bit lumpy I suppose.
And that's one of the things about it being so low poly.
Ultimately it's trying to round something that was quite faceted to begin with.
The only way really around that is to keep bumping up the subdivisions and eventually you do end up
with something that's pretty smooth but that comes at a cost.
We are now when we hit six subdivisions up at 212 almost two hundred and thirteen thousand vertices.
That's an awful lot for a small piece.
And if we think the rest of our scene is going to have multiple of these pieces you really do have to
be careful. Now,
Whereas in a game engine the graphics card is capable of handling a lot of vertex data.
That's what it's doing because we're constantly editing and moving around even though we're using our
GPU in certain ways.
All of that vertex data is being held with the CPU on our computer so we can get really bogged down
and end up with a very slow viewport if we're not careful.
So it's worthwhile bearing that in mind when you start cranking up the subdivisions.
However if you go in for a photo realistic scene there's no reason why your final render subdivision
count couldn't be high.
So we can knock this down to maybe even now not not one but two subdivisions.
That gives us the basic shape.
There's not much of an improvement in shape when we go beyond two with this particular model.
What does happen here is you get a much better looking model.
And when we're modelling that's not necessarily what we're after or after performance in the viewport
itself.
So we can get away with that.
However the render.
That's why you might want to bump it up and then when you do render it you may find it takes longer
to render than it would have done before.
But as you can see here that looks pretty sweet at this point.
It's almost time to put materials on this thing but I think we finish off the rest of the model first.
So there we go there's an exploration on sort of alternatives to bevelling and you can see that the
power of modifiers and just taking a different look at your models and realizing they can be incredibly
low poly yet high detail at the same time.
So that's it for this lecture if you've got any tips or different workflows that you want to share with
the community then do reach out over in the discussions let us know how you would do this.
I'd be very intrigued if you've got a different workflow and share it because there's never a wrong
way of modelling in Blender that's just different ways.
So share that over in the discussions and I'll see you all in the next lecture.